PHP: Updates to instrumentation docs (#3855)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io: content/en/docs/languages/php/instrumentation.md

{{% docs/languages/manual-intro %}}

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

This page uses a modified version of the example app from
[Getting Started](/docs/languages/php/getting-started/) to help you learn about
instrumenting your code.

You don't have to use the example app: if you want to instrument your own app or
library, follow the instructions here to adapt the process to your own code.

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

In an empty directory initialize a minimal `composer.json` file:

```shell
composer init \
  --no-interaction \
  --require slim/slim:"^4" \
  --require slim/psr7:"^1" \
  --require monolog/monolog:"^3"
composer update
```

### Create and launch an HTTP Server

To highlight the difference between instrumenting a _library_ and a standalone
_app_, split out the dice rolling into a _library file_, which then will be

> imported as a dependency by the _app file_.

Reviewer: I'd remove the italics here. Not needed.

> Create the _library file_ named `dice.php` and add the following code to it:

Reviewer: Ditto.

{{% docs/languages/manual-intro %}}

## Example app preparation {#example-app}

These instructions use a modified version of the example app from
[Getting Started](/docs/languages/php/getting-started/) to help you learn
how to instrument your PHP code.

If you want to instrument your own app or library, follow the instructions
to adapt the process to your own code.

### Dependencies {#example-app-dependencies}

In an empty directory, initialize a minimal `composer.json` file
with the following content:

```shell
composer init \
  --no-interaction \
  --require slim/slim:"^4" \
  --require slim/psr7:"^1" \
  --require monolog/monolog:"^3"
composer update
```

### Create and launch an HTTP Server

> To highlight the difference between instrumenting a _library_ and a standalone
> _app_, split out the dice rolling into a _library file_, which then will be
> imported as a dependency by the _app file_.
> 
> Create the _library file_ named `dice.php` and add the following code to it:

Author: ```suggestion
To highlight the difference between instrumenting a library and a standalone
app, split out the dice rolling into a library file, which then will be
imported as a dependency by the app file.

Create the library file named `dice.php` and add the following code to it:
```

```php
<?php
class Dice {

    private $tracer;

    function __construct() {
    }

    public function roll($rolls) {
        $result = [];
        for ($i = 0; $i < $rolls; $i++) {
            $result[] = $this->rollOnce();
        }
        return $result;
    }

    private function rollOnce() {
      $result = random_int(1, 6);
      return $result;
    }
}
```

> Create the _app file_ named `index.php` and add the following code to it:

Author: ```suggestion
Create the app file named `index.php` and add the following code to it:
```

composer require guzzlehttp/guzzle
```

> Now you can install the OpenTelemetry API and

Reviewer 2: this is definitely still installing the SDK (API was installed a few lines up)

Author: ```suggestion
Now you can install the OpenTelemetry SDK, and OTLP exporter:
```

I will revert that change, not sure why I had it in the first place

    ->buildAndRegisterGlobal();
```

> Include this file at the top of your application file `index.php`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Include this code at the top of your application file `index.php`:
```

```php
<?php
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface as Response;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface as Request;
use Psr\Log\LogLevel;
use Slim\Factory\AppFactory;
use Monolog\Logger;
use Monolog\Handler\StreamHandler;

require __DIR__ . '/vendor/autoload.php';

require('dice.php');
require('instrumentation.php');

// ...
```

For debugging and local development purposes, the example exports telemetry to
the console. After you have finished setting up manual instrumentation, you need
to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export the app's telemetry data](/docs/languages/php/exporters/) to one or more
telemetry backends.

The example also sets up the mandatory SDK default attribute `service.name`,
which holds the logical name of the service, and the optional (but highly

> encouraged!) attribute `service.version`, which holds the version of the service

Reviewer: I think I've left similar comments in https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry.io/pull/3834 — we should sweep the docs everywhere to fix the issues...

    ->buildAndRegisterGlobal();
```

Include this code at the top of your application file `index.php`:

```php
<?php
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface as Response;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface as Request;
use Psr\Log\LogLevel;
use Slim\Factory\AppFactory;
use Monolog\Logger;
use Monolog\Handler\StreamHandler;

require __DIR__ . '/vendor/autoload.php';

require('dice.php');
require('instrumentation.php');

// ...
```

For debugging and local development purposes, the example exports telemetry to
the console. After you have finished setting up manual instrumentation, you need
to configure an appropriate exporter to
[export the app's telemetry data](/docs/languages/php/exporters/) to one or more
telemetry backends.

The example also sets up the mandatory SDK default attribute `service.name`,

> which holds the logical name of the service, and the optional (but highly
> encouraged!) attribute `service.version`, which holds the version of the service

Author: ```suggestion
which holds the logical name of the service, and the optional, but highly
encouraged, attribute `service.version`, which holds the version of the service
```

## Traces

### Initialize Tracing

{{% alert title="Note" color="info" %}} If you’re instrumenting a library,
**skip this step**. {{% /alert %}}

To enable [tracing](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/) in your app, you'll need to
have an initialized
[`TracerProvider`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer-provider) that will let
you create a [`Tracer`](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer).

If a `TracerProvider` is not created, the OpenTelemetry APIs for tracing will
use a no-op implementation and fail to generate data. As explained next, modify

> the `instrumentation.ts` (or `instrumentation.js`) file to include all the SDK

Author: oh... let me double check on that

  'instrumentation-scope-version', //version
  'http://example.com/my-schema', //schema url
  ['foo' => 'bar'] //attributes
);
```

The values of `instrumentation-scope-name` and `instrumentation-scope-version`
should uniquely identify the
[Instrumentation Scope](/docs/concepts/instrumentation-scope/), such as the
package, module or class name. While the name is required, the version is still
recommended despite being optional.

It's generally recommended to call `getTracer` in your app when you need it
rather than exporting the `tracer` instance to the rest of your app. This helps
avoid trickier application load issues when other required dependencies are
involved.

In the case of the [example app](#example-app), there are two places where a
tracer may be acquired with an appropriate Instrumentation Scope:

First, in the _application file_ `index.php`:

```php
<?php
use Psr\Http\Message\ResponseInterface as Response;
use Psr\Http\Message\ServerRequestInterface as Request;
use Psr\Log\LogLevel;
use Slim\Factory\AppFactory;
use Monolog\Logger;
use Monolog\Handler\StreamHandler;
use OpenTelemetry\API\Globals;

require __DIR__ . '/vendor/autoload.php';

require('dice.php');

> require('instrumentation.php');

Reviewer 2: this might be a js/node copy-paste. I don't see any indication of what might be in this file, but presumably the setup code to create and register providers?

  '0.1.0',
  'https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.24.0'
);

$logger = new Logger('dice-server');
$logger->pushHandler(new StreamHandler('php://stdout', Logger::INFO));

$app = AppFactory::create();

$dice = new Dice();

$app->get('/rolldice', function (Request $request, Response $response) use ($logger, $dice, $tracer) {
// ...
}
```

And second, in the _library file_ `dice.php`:

```php
<?php
use OpenTelemetry\API\Globals;
use OpenTelemetry\SemConv\TraceAttributes;

class Dice {

    private $tracer;

    function __construct() {
        $tracerProvider = Globals::tracerProvider();
        $this->tracer = $tracerProvider->getTracer(
          'dice-lib',
          '0.1.0',
          'https://opentelemetry.io/schemas/1.24.0'
        );
    }

    public function roll($rolls) {
        $result = [];
        for ($i = 0; $i < $rolls; $i++) {
            $result[] = $this->rollOnce();
        }
        return $result;
    }

    private function rollOnce() {
      $result = random_int(1, 6);
      return $result
    }
}
```

### Create Spans

Now that you have [tracers](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#tracer) initialized,
you can create [spans](/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#spans).

> The code below illustrates how to create an active span.

Reviewer 2: I think "active span" should just refer to a span that has been activated via `$span->activate()`. So, remove the word "active"

Author: ```suggestion
The code below illustrates how to create a span.
```

```php
<?php
public function roll($rolls) {
    $span = $this->tracer->spanBuilder("rollTheDice")->startSpan();
    $result = [];
    for ($i = 0; $i < $rolls; $i++) {
        $result[] = $this->rollOnce();
    }
    $span->end();
    return $result;
}
```

> Note, that it's required to `end()` the span, otherwise it will not be sent.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note, that it's required to `end()` the span, otherwise it will not be exported.
```
